---
title: Literary Terms and Figures of Speech
tags:
  - period-study
  - questions
---

## Literary Terms and Figures of Speech

### Alliteration
**alliteration:** Alliteration is the repetition of a speech sound in a sequence of nearby words. Usually the term is applied only to consonants, and only when the recurrent sound is made emphatic because it begins a word or a stressed syllable within a word. In Old English **alliterative meter**, alliteration is the principal organizing device of the verse line: the verse is unrhymed; each line is divided into two half-lines of two strong stresses by a decisive pause, or *caesura*; and at least one, and usually both, of the two stressed syllables in the first half-line alliterate with the first stressed syllable of the second half-line. (In this type of versification a vowel was considered to alliterate with any other vowel.) A number of Middle English poems, such as William Langland’s *Piers Plowman* and the romance *Sir Gawain and the Green Knight*, both written in the fourteenth century, continued to use and play variations upon the old alliterative meter. (See *strong-stress meters*.) In the opening line of *Piers Plowman*, for example, all four of the stressed syllables alliterate:
> In a sómer séson, when sóft was the sónne….

In later English versification, however, alliteration is used only for special stylistic effects, such as to reinforce the meaning, to link related words, or to provide tone color and enhance the palpability of enunciating the words. An example is the repetition of the s, th, and w consonants in Shakespeare’s Sonnet 30:
> When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
> I summon up remembrance of things past,
> I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought
> And with old woes new wail my dear time’s waste….

Various other repetitions of speech sounds are identified by special terms:
**Consonance** is the repetition of a sequence of two or more consonants, but with a change in the intervening vowel: live-love, lean-alone, pitter-patter. W. H. Auden’s poem of the 1930s, “‘O where are you going?’ said reader to rider,” makes prominent use of this device...
**Assonance** is the repetition of identical or similar vowels—especially in stressed syllables—in a sequence of nearby words. Note the recurrent long i in the opening lines of Keats’ “Ode on a Grecian Urn” (1820):
> Thou still unravished bride of quietness,
> Thou foster child of silence and slow time….

The richly assonantal effect at the beginning of William Collins’ “Ode to Evening” (1747) is achieved by a patterned sequence of changing vowels:
> If aught of oaten stop or pastoral song,
> May hope, chaste Eve, to soothe thy pensive ear….

For a special case of the repetition of vowels and consonants in combination, see *rhyme*.

### Ballad
**ballad:** A short definition of the **popular ballad** (also called the **folk ballad** or **traditional ballad**) is that it is a song, transmitted orally, which tells a story. Ballads are thus the narrative species of *folk songs*, which originate, and are communicated orally, among illiterate or only partly literate people. In all probability the initial version of a ballad was composed by a single author, but he or she is unknown; and since each singer who learns and repeats an oral ballad is apt to introduce changes in both the text and the tune, it exists in many variant forms. Typically, the popular ballad is dramatic, condensed, and impersonal: the narrator begins with the climactic episode, tells the story tersely in action and dialogue (sometimes by means of dialogue alone), and tells it without self-reference or the expression of personal attitudes or feelings.
The most common stanza form—called the **ballad stanza**—is a *quatrain* in alternate four- and three-stress lines; usually only the second and fourth lines rhyme. This is the form of “Sir Patrick Spens”; the first stanza also exemplifies the abrupt opening of the typical ballad, and the manner of proceeding by third-person narration, curtly sketched setting and action, sharp transition, and spare dialogue:
> The king sits in Dumferling towne,
> Drinking the blude-red wine:
> “O whar will I get a guid sailor,
> To sail this schip of mine?”

Many ballads employ set formulas (which helped the singer remember the course of the song) including (1) stock descriptive phrases like “blood-red wine” and “milk-white steed,” (2) a *refrain* in each stanza (“Edward,” “Lord Randall”), and (3) **incremental repetition**, in which a line or stanza is repeated, but with an addition that advances the story (“Lord Randall,” “Child Waters”). See *oral poetry*.
Although many traditional ballads probably originated in the later Middle Ages, they were not collected and printed until the eighteenth century, first in England, then in Germany. In 1765 Thomas Percy published his *Reliques of Ancient English Poetry* which, although most of the contents had been revised in the style of Percy’s era, did much to inaugurate widespread interest in folk literature. The basic modern collection is Francis J. Child’s *English and Scottish Popular Ballads* (1882–98), which includes 305 ballads, many of them in variant versions. Bertrand H. Bronson has edited *The Traditional Tunes of the Child Ballads* (4 vols., 1959–72). Popular ballads are still being sung—and collected, now with the help of an electronic recorder—in the British Isles and remote rural areas of America. To the songs that early settlers brought with them from Great Britain, America has added native forms of the ballad, such as those sung by lumberjacks, cowboys, laborers, and social protesters. A number of recent folk singers, including Woody Guthrie, Bob Dylan, and Joan Baez, themselves compose ballads; most of these, however, such as “The Ballad of Bonnie and Clyde” (about a notorious gangster and his moll), are closer to the journalistic “broadside ballad” than to the archaic and heroic mode of the popular ballads in the Child collection.
A **broadside ballad** is a ballad that was printed on one side of a single sheet (called a “broadside”), dealt with a current event or person or issue, and was sung to a well-known tune. Beginning with the sixteenth century, these broadsides were hawked in the streets or at country fairs in Great Britain.
The traditional ballad has greatly influenced the form and style of lyric poetry in general. It has also engendered the **literary ballad**, which is a narrative poem written in deliberate imitation of the form, language, and spirit of the traditional ballad. In Germany, some major literary ballads were composed in the latter eighteenth century, including G. A. Bürger’s very popular “Lenore” (1774)—which soon became widely read and influential in an English translation—and Goethe’s “Erlkönig” (1782). In England, some of the best literary ballads were composed in the *Romantic Period*: Coleridge’s “Rime of the Ancient Mariner” (which, however, is much longer and has a much more elaborate plot than the folk ballad), Walter Scott’s “Proud Maisie,” and Keats’ “La Belle Dame sans Merci.” In his *Lyrical Ballads* of 1798, Wordsworth begins “We Are Seven” by introducing a narrator as an agent and first-person teller of the story—“I met a little cottage girl”—which is probably one reason he called the collection “lyrical ballads.” Coleridge’s “Ancient Mariner,” on the other hand, of which the first version also appeared in *Lyrical Ballads*, opens with the abrupt and impersonal third-person narration of the traditional ballad:
> It is an ancient Mariner
> And he stoppeth one of three….

### Dramatic Monologue
**dramatic monologue:** A **monologue** is a lengthy speech by a single person. In a play, when a character utters a monologue that expresses his or her private thoughts, it is called a *soliloquy*. **Dramatic monologue**, however, does not designate a component in a play, but a type of lyric poem that was perfected by Robert Browning. In its fullest form, as represented in Browning’s “My Last Duchess,” “The Bishop Orders His Tomb,” “Andrea del Sarto,” and many other poems, the dramatic monologue has the following features: (1) A single person, who is patently not the poet, utters the speech that makes up the whole of the poem, in a specific situation at a critical moment: the Duke is negotiating with an emissary for a second wife; the Bishop lies dying; Andrea once more attempts wistfully to believe his wife’s lies. (2) This person addresses and interacts with one or more other people; but we know of the auditors’ presence, and what they say and do, only from clues in the discourse of the single speaker. (3) The main principle controlling the poet’s choice and formulation of what the lyric speaker says is to reveal to the reader, in a way that enhances its interest, the speaker’s temperament and character.
In monologues such as “Soliloquy of the Spanish Cloister” and “Caliban upon Setebos,” Browning omits the second feature, the presence of a silent auditor; but features 1 and 3 are the necessary conditions of a dramatic monologue. The third feature—the focus on self-revelation—serves to distinguish a dramatic monologue from its near relation, the **dramatic lyric**, which is also a monologue uttered in an identifiable situation at a dramatic moment. John Donne’s “The Canonization” and “The Flea” (1613), for example, are dramatic lyrics that lack only one feature of the dramatic monologue: the focus of interest is primarily on the speaker’s elaborately ingenious argument, rather than on the character he inadvertently reveals in the course of arguing. And although Wordsworth’s “Tintern Abbey” (1798) is spoken by one person to a silent auditor (his sister) in a specific situation at a significant moment in his life, it is not a dramatic monologue proper, both because we are invited to identify the speaker with the poet himself, and because the organizing principle and focus of interest is not the revelation of the speaker’s distinctive temperament, but the evolution of his observations, memories, and thoughts toward the resolution of an emotional problem.
Tennyson wrote “Ulysses” (1842) and other dramatic monologues, and the form has been used by H. D. (Hilda Doolittle), Amy Lowell, Robert Frost, E. A. Robinson, Ezra Pound, Robert Lowell, and other poets of the twentieth century. The best-known modern instance is T. S. Eliot’s “The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock” (1915).

### Elegy
**elegy:** In Greek and Roman times, “elegy” denoted any poem written in **elegiac meter** (alternating hexameter and pentameter lines). The term was also used, however, to refer to the subject matter of change and loss frequently expressed in the elegiac verse form, especially in complaints about love. In accordance with this latter usage, “The Wanderer,” “The Seafarer,” and other poems in Old English on the transience of all worldly things are even now called elegies. In Europe and England the word continued to have a variable application through the Renaissance. John Donne’s elegies, written in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, are love poems, although they relate to the sense of elegy as lament, in that many of them emphasize mutability and loss. In the seventeenth century the term **elegy** began to be limited to its most common present usage: a formal and sustained lament in verse for the death of a particular person, usually ending in a consolation. Examples are the medieval poem *Pearl* and Chaucer’s *Book of the Duchess* (elegies in the mode of *dream allegory*); Alfred, Lord Tennyson’s *In Memoriam* (1850), on the death of Arthur Hallam; and W. H. Auden’s “In Memory of W. B. Yeats” (1940). Occasionally the term is used in its older and broader sense, for somber meditations on mortality such as Thomas Gray’s “Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard” (1757), and the *Duino Elegies* (1912–22) of the German poet Rainer Maria Rilke on the transience both of poets and of the earthly objects they write poems about.
The **dirge** is also a versified expression of grief on the occasion of a particular person’s death, but differs from the elegy in that it is short, is less formal, and is usually represented as a text to be sung; examples are Shakespeare’s “Full Fathom Five Thy Father Lies” and William Collins’ “A Song from Shakespeare’s *Cymbeline*” (1749). **Threnody** is now used mainly as an equivalent for “dirge,” and **monody** for an elegy or dirge which is presented as the utterance of a single person. John Milton describes his “Lycidas” (1638) in the subtitle as a “monody” in which “the Author bewails a learned Friend,” and Matthew Arnold called his elegy on A. H. Clough “Thyrsis: A Monody” (1866).
An important subtype is the **pastoral elegy**, which represents both the poet and the one he mourns—who is usually also a poet—as shepherds (the Latin word for shepherd is “pastor”). This poetic form was originated by the Sicilian Greek poet Theocritus, was continued by the Roman Virgil, was developed in various European countries during the Renaissance, and remained current in English poetry through the nineteenth century. Notable English pastoral elegies are Spenser’s “Astrophel,” on the death of Sir Philip Sidney (1595); Milton’s “Lycidas” (1638); Shelley’s “Adonais” (1821); and in the Victorian age, Arnold’s “Thyrsis.”

### Epic and Mock epic
**epic:** In its strict sense the term **epic** or **heroic poem** is applied to a work that meets at least the following criteria: it is a long verse narrative on a serious subject, told in a formal and elevated style, and centered on a heroic or quasi-divine figure on whose actions depends the fate of a tribe, a nation, or (in the instance of John Milton’s *Paradise Lost*) the human race.
There is a standard distinction between **traditional** and **literary epics**. “Traditional epics” (also called “folk epics” or “primary epics”) were written versions of what had originally been oral poems about a tribal or national hero during a warlike age. (See *oral poetry*.) Among these are the *Iliad* and *Odyssey* that the Greeks ascribed to Homer; the Anglo-Saxon *Beowulf*; the French *Chanson de Roland* and the Spanish *Poema del Cid* in the twelfth century; and the thirteenth-century German epic *Nibelungenlied*. “Literary epics” were composed by individual poetic craftsmen in deliberate imitation of the traditional form. Of this kind is Virgil’s Latin poem the *Aeneid*, which later served as the chief model for Milton’s literary epic *Paradise Lost* (1667). *Paradise Lost* in turn became, in the *Romantic Period*, a model for John Keats’ fragmentary epic *Hyperion*, as well as for William Blake’s several epics, or “prophetic books” (*The Four Zoas*, *Milton*, *Jerusalem*), which translated into Blake’s own mythic terms the biblical narrative that had been Milton’s subject.
The epic was ranked by Aristotle as second only to tragedy, and by many Renaissance critics as the highest of all genres. The literary epic is certainly the most ambitious of poetic enterprises, making immense demands on a poet’s knowledge, invention, and skill to sustain the scope, grandeur, and authority of a poem that tends to encompass the world of its day and a large portion of its learning. Despite numerous attempts in many languages over nearly three thousand years, we possess no more than a half-dozen such poems of indubitable greatness. Literary epics are highly conventional compositions which usually share the following features, derived by way of the *Aeneid* from the traditional epics of Homer:
1.  The hero is a figure of great national or even cosmic importance...
2.  The setting of the poem is ample in scale, and may be worldwide, or even larger...
3.  The action involves extraordinary deeds in battle...or a long, arduous, and dangerous journey...
4.  In these great actions the gods and other supernatural beings take an interest or an active part—the Olympian gods in Homer, and Jehovah, Christ, and the angels in *Paradise Lost*. These supernatural agents were in the *Neoclassic Age* called the **machinery**...
5.  An epic poem is a ceremonial performance, and is narrated in a ceremonial style which is deliberately distanced from ordinary speech and proportioned to the grandeur and formality of the heroic subject and architecture...

There are also widely used **epic conventions**, or formulas, in the choice and ordering of episodes; prominent among them are these features, as exemplified in *Paradise Lost*:
1. The narrator begins by stating his **argument**, or epic theme, invokes a **muse** or guiding spirit to inspire him in his great undertaking, then addresses to the muse the **epic question**, the answer to which inaugurates the narrative proper...
2. The narrative starts **in medias res** (“in the middle of things”), at a critical point in the action...
3. There are **catalogues** of some of the principal characters, introduced in formal detail...

The term “epic” is often applied, by extension, to narratives which differ in many respects from this model but manifest the epic spirit and grandeur in the scale, the scope, and the profound human importance of their subjects... In a still more extended application, the Marxist critic Georg Lukács used the term **bourgeois epic** for all novels which, in his view, reflect the social reality of their capitalist age on a broad scale.

**mock epic** or **mock-heroic** poem is that type of parody which imitates, in a sustained way, both the elaborate form and the ceremonious style of the epic genre, but applies it to narrate a commonplace or trivial subject matter. In a masterpiece of this type, *The Rape of the Lock* (1714), Alexander Pope views through the grandiose epic perspective a quarrel between the belles and elegants of his day over the theft of a lady’s curl. The story includes such elements of traditional epic protocol as supernatural machinery, a voyage on board ship, a visit to the underworld, and a heroically scaled battle between the sexes—although with metaphors, hatpins, and snuff for weapons. The term mock-heroic is often applied to other dignified poetic forms which are purposely mismatched to a lowly subject; for example, to Thomas Gray’s comic “Ode on the Death of a Favorite Cat” (1748); see under *bathos and anticlimax*.

### Hyperbole
**hyperbole and understatement:** The figure of speech, or *trope*, called **hyperbole** (hıpur' bol e”: Greek for “overshooting”) is bold overstatement, or the extravagant exaggeration of fact or of possibility. It may be used either for serious or ironic or comic effect. Iago says gloatingly of Othello (III. iii. 330ff.):
> Not poppy nor mandragora,
> Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world,
> Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep
> Which thou ow’dst yesterday.

Famed examples in the seventeenth century are Ben Jonson’s gallantly hyperbolic compliments to his lady in “Drink to me only with thine eyes,” and the ironic hyperboles in “To His Coy Mistress,” by which Andrew Marvell attests how infinitely slowly his “vegetable love should grow”—if he had “but world enough and time.” The “tall talk” or **tall tale** of the American West is a form of mainly comic hyperbole. There is the story of a cowboy in an eastern restaurant who ordered a steak well done. “Do you call this well done?” he roared at the server. “I’ve seen critters hurt worse than that get well!”
The contrary figure is **understatement** (the Greek term is **meiosis**, “lessening”), which deliberately represents something as very much less in magnitude or importance than it really is, or is ordinarily considered to be. The effect is usually ironic... A special form of understatement is **litotes** (Greek for “plain” or “simple”), the assertion of an affirmative by negating its contrary: “He’s not the brightest man in the world” meaning “He is stupid.”

### Onomatopoeia
**onomatopoeia:** Onomatopoeia, sometimes called **echoism**, is used both in a narrow and in a broad sense.
1. In the narrow and most common use, onomatopo