---
title: 1. The underlined words in the following sentence is:-
tags:
  - 2nd-grade
  - movement-study
  - period-study
  - previous-papers
  - questions
---

### 1. The underlined words in the following sentence is:-
I _can't stand_ travelling in the rush hours
(1) adverb
(2) modals
(3) phrasal verbs
(4) verb

### 2. The underlined word in the following sentence is:-
The story he narrated was _uninteresting_
(1) adverb
(2) adjective
(3) verb
(4) preposition

### 3. The underlined word in the following sentence is:-
Will you do me a _favour_?
(1) adjective
(2) verb
(3) noun
(4) adverb

### 4. The underlined word in the following sentence is
The plane flew _overhead_
(1) adverb
(2) adjective
(3) noun
(4) verb

### 5. choose the appropriate determiner: ________ side of the rhombus has the same length.
(1) each
(2) all
(3) no
(4) some

### 6. choose the appropriate determiner: his second suggestion was _________ better than his first.
(1) much
(2) more
(3) most
(4) very

### 7. choose the appropriate determiner: ___________ of the two books cover my syllabus.
(1) all
(2) neither
(3) no
(4) none

### 8. choose the appropriate determiner: this car belongs to ________lady next door.
(1) no
(2) which
(3) one
(4) the

### 9. choose the appropriate determiner: all _______ chocolates are for you.
(1) there
(2) this
(3) these
(4) which

### 10. choose the appropriate determiner: the stranger asked _________ questions.
(1) all
(2) many
(3) little
(4) much

### 11. choose the correct tense from the given verbs: we _____ a terrifying noise that night. (hear)
(1) hearing
(2) heard
(3) hear
(4) have heard

### 12. choose the correct tense from the given verbs: in a few years we all ________ in multi-storeyed houses. (live)
(1) will have live
(2) had lived
(3) should living
(4) will be living

### 13. choose the correct tense from the given verbs: she _________ me since 2008 (know)
(1) has known
(2) is known
(3) had known
(4) has been known

### 14. choose the correct tense from the given verbs: i’m sorry, i ______________ not (concentrate), i ___________ (think) about something else
(1) am concentrating, was thinking
(2) could not concentrate, was thinking
(3) will concentrate, would think
(4) none of these

### 15. choose the correct tense from the given verbs: this is the third time my car _________ since i bought it (breakdown)
(1) had broke down
(2) has broken down
(3) have broke down
(4) has broke down

### 16. choose the correct tense from the given verbs: two weeks have passed since i _______ him. (see)
(1) saw
(2) have see
(3) had see
(4) see

### 17. choose the correct tense from the given verbs: no sooner we ____________ the stadium, it started raining. (reach)
(1) reached
(2) did reached
(3) reaching
(4) did reach

### 18. choose the correct option: a good deal of useful information ________ already reached me.
(1) have
(2) is
(3) has
(4) is not

### 19. choose the correct option: a new pair of shoes __________ under the bed.
(1) are lying
(2) is lying
(3) laid
(4) none of these

### 20. choose the correct option: one of my friends _________ visiting me this summer.
(1) were
(2) is
(3) are
(4) will

### 21. choose the correct option: smuggling illegal immigrants out of mexico __________ against the law. (be)
(1) are
(2) were
(3) is
(4) an

### 22. choose the correct option: the only people who are interested in the book _______ to be lawyers. (seem)
(1) seemed
(2) seems
(3) seem
(4) seeming

### 23. choose the correct option: neither of the two __________ willing to apologize.
(1) was
(2) were
(3) be
(4) have

### 24. choose the correct preposition: his house is very different ____________ your house.
(1) to
(2) from
(3) of
(4) with

### 25. choose the correct preposition: he is entirely absorbed ________ his studies.
(1) of
(2) in
(3) by
(4) to

### 26. choose the correct preposition: he lives ________ begging.
(1) to
(2) of
(3) with
(4) by

### 27. choose the correct preposition: were there many people __________ the meeting?
(1) inside
(2) at
(3) of
(4) with

### 28. choose the correct preposition: ____________ helping the poor, we help students also.
(1) to
(2) beside
(3) besides
(4) in

### 29. choose the correct preposition: divide these twelve mangoes ____________ the three boys.
(1) to
(2) between
(3) for
(4) among

### 30. transform the following sentences as directed :- i saw her a week ago. (change to negative)
(1) i not saw her a week ago
(2) i did not see her a week ago
(3) i not seen her a week ago
(4) i have not see her a week ago

### 31. transform the following sentences as directed :- everyone would like to be famous (change to interrogative)
(1) who would not like to be famous?
(2) who would like to be famous?
(3) everyone likes to be famous?
(4) everyone would not like to be famous, is it?

### 32. transform the following sentences as directed :- how can i ever repay your debt? (change to affirmative)
(1) i can repay you debt.
(2) i can ever repay your debt.
(3) i can never repay your debt.
(4) how can i never repay your debt?

### 33. transform the following sentences as directed :- all the problems will be solved by the government. (change to active voice)
(1) all the problems will solve the government.
(2) problems will solve by the government.
(3) the government will solve all the problems.
(4) the government will be solve all the problems.

### 34. transform the following sentences as directed :- someone explained the procedure to me. (change to passive voice)
(1) the procedure was explained to me.
(2) i was explained the procedure.
(3) both “the procedure was explained to me.” and “i was explained the procedure.”
(4) the procedure is explained to me

### 35. transform the following sentences as directed :- the wind blew out the lamp. (change to passive voice)
(1) the lamp was blown out of the wind.
(2) the lamp was blown out by the wind.
(3) the lamp is blown out by the wind.
(4) the lamp has blown out by the wind.

### 36. transform the following sentences as directed :- the book interested me. (change to passive voice)
(1) i was interested by the book.
(2) i am interested with the book.
(3) i was interested in the book.
(4) this book has interested me.

### 37. transform the following sentences as directed :- karuna has withdrawn the money. (change to passive voice)
(1) the money has been withdrawn by karuna.
(2) the money was withdrawn by karuna.
(3) the money is withdrawn by karuna.
(4) karuna has withdrawn the money.

### 38. transform the following sentences as directed :- everybody knows that he is rich. (change to passive voice)
(1) he is known to be rich.
(2) that he is rich everybody know.
(3) he knows that everybody is rich.
(4) he is rich and that is known.

### 39. transform the following sentences as directed :- the referee was being escorted from the football field by a strong police guard. (change to active voice)
(1) the referee was escorting a strong police guard from the football field.
(2) a strong police guard was escorting the referee from the football field.
(3) a strong referee was being escorted by police guard.
(4) the football field was being escorted.

### 40. transform the following sentences as directed :- raveena said to me “what a pity you missed my sister’s wedding” (change the narration)
(1) raveena exclaimed that it was a great pity i had missed her sister’s wedding.
(2) ravena said that it was a pity that she had missed her sister’s wedding.
(3) raveena said that how it was pity she had missed her wedding.
(4) raveena told that it was pity to miss her sister’s wedding.

### 41. transform the following sentences as directed :- satvik said to me “when are you coming here?” (change the narration)
(1) satvik asked me when i was going there.
(2) satvik asked when he was going there.
(3) satvik told when i was going there
(4) satvik asked who was coming there.

### 42. transform the following sentences as directed :- sneha said “which firm are you working with?” (change the narration)
(1) sneha asked me which firm i am working with.
(2) sneha said to me which firm i am working with.
(3) sneha said which firm i work with.
(4) sneha asked me which firm i was working with.

### 43. transform the following sentences as directed :- the young man said “o god help me clear this interview” (change the narration)
(1) the young man prayed to god to help him clear that interview.
(2) the young man wanted god to clear him in interview.
(3) the young man told god to help in interview.
(4) the young man said to god to help him in interview.

### 44. transform the following sentences as directed :- ravi asked me if i was satisfied with the answer. (change to direct speech)
(1) ravi says “are you being satisfied with the answer”.
(2) ravi told me “am i satisfied with the answer”
(3) ravi said (to me) “are you satisfied with the answer”
(4) ravi tells me “i am satisfied with the answer”

### 45. identify the correct conditional sentence:-
(1) you will succeed if you do as i tell you.
(2) you will succeed if you shall do as i tell you.
(3) you would succeed if you do as i tell you.
(4) you shall succeed if you do as i told you.

### 46. identify the correct conditional sentence : -
(1) if it will stop snowing, we will go out.
(2) if it will stop snowing, we can go out.
(3) if it stops snowing, we can go out
(4) none of these.

### 47. identify the correct conditional sentence:
(1) if i had a computer, i would typed it myself.
(2) if i had a computer i will type it myself.
(3) if i had a computer i would type it myself.
(4) if i would have a computer i type it myself.

### 48. identify the correct conditional sentence
(1) suppose your business fails, what does you do?
(2) suppose your business fails, what are you do?
(3) suppose your business fails, what you do?
(4) suppose your business fails, what will you do?

### 49. choose the correct modal auxiliary from the options given :- you __________ not have spoken like this ?
(1) must to
(2) ought to
(3) should
(4) need to

### 50. choose the correct modal auxiliary from the options given :- i was afraid that if i had asked him again he __________ refuse.
(1) must
(2) might
(3) need not
(4) have to

### 51. choose the correct modal auxiliary from the options given :- you _______ visit your parents more often (obligation)
(1) need
(2) should
(3) used
(4) may

### 52. choose the correct modal auxiliary from the options given :- cooking _________ be a real pleasure (possibility)
(1) should
(2) will
(3) can
(4) ought

### 53. choose the correct modal auxiliary from the options given :- ___________ we talk about something different now? (suggestion)
(1) would
(2) need
(3) shall
(4) have

### 54. Choose the option that gives the meaning of the underlined phrasal verbs/idioms :-
I was _held up_ by the traffic and couldn't reach the office in time
(1) raise up
(2) to let go
(3) detained
(4) all of these

### 55. Choose the option that gives the meaning of the underlined phrasal verbs/idioms:-
I never expected that you would _let me down_.
(1) to conceal
(2) disappoint
(3) to restrain
(4) agree with

### 56. Choose the option that gives the meaning of the underlined phrasal verbs/idioms:-
He had nothing to _fall back upon_ when the flood took away everything
(1) to strike back
(2) to back out
(3) to have resources, some help
(4) none of these

### 57. Which of the given options matches the underlined words/phrase:-
My friend _paid me a brief visit_ yesterday.
(1) called me up
(2) called on me
(3) rang me up
(4) none of these

### 58. Which of the given options matches the underlined word/phrase:-
Never _postpone_ till tomorrow what you can do today
(1) cancel
(2) put away
(3) put on
(4) put off

### 59. fill in the correct option :- winter _________ early in kashmir.
(1) sets on
(2) sets off
(3) sets out
(4) sets in

### 60. fill the correct option :- i would not like to __________ too much of your time.
(1) take to
(2) take over
(3) take up
(4) take after

### 61. choose the option that correctly joins the given sentences :- he has been driving a car for the past couple of months. he still lacks confidence.
(1) since he has been driving a car for the past couple of months so that he still lacks confidence.
(2) while he has been driving a car for the past couple of months because he still lacks confidence.
(3) although he has been driving a car for the past couple of months, he still lacks confidence.
(4) not only he has been driving a car for the past couple of month but also he still lacks confidence.

### 62. choose the option that correctly joins the given sentences:- aryan is very good teacher. he is a professional singer
(1) not only aryan is a very good teacher also he is a professional singer.
(2) not only is aryan a very good teacher yet he is a professional singer.
(3) aryan is both a very good teacher also aryan is professional singer.
(4) aryan is not only a very good teacher but also a professional singer

### 63. choose the option that correctly joins the given sentences :- the crow heard a noise. the crow flew away.
(1) on hearing a noise the crow flew away.
(2) when the crow heard a noise, so he flew away.
(3) the crow heard a noise moreover he flew away
(4) although the crow heard a noise yet he flew away

### 64. choose the option that correctly joins the given sentences:- the problem is very difficult. i cannot solve it.
(1) the problem is too difficult, i cannot solve it therefore
(2) the problem is too difficult to be solved
(3) for me to solve it the problem is being very difficult
(4) the problem is very difficult nevertheless i cannot solve it.

### 65. choose the option that correctly joins the given sentences:- i prefer to eat at home. it is more hygienic. eating out during working hours is more convenient.
(1) i prefer eating as it is more hygienic but eating out during working hours is more convenient
(2) i prefer to eat at home as it is more hygienic although eating out during working hours is more convenient.
(3) although, i prefer to eat at home as it is more hygienic but also eating out is more convenient
(4) not only i prefer to eat at home so it is more hygienic, eating out during working hours but also its more convenient.

### 66. choose the option that correctly joins the given sentences:- the chief guest finished his speech. i started reciting my poem.
(1) immediately the chief guest finished his speech i started reciting my poem
(2) on the chief guest finishing his speech, i started reciting my poem
(3) as soon as chief guest finished his speech, i started reciting my poem
(4) just as the chief guest finished his speech so also i reciting my poem

### 67. choose the option that correctly joins the given sentences:- the bridge had been weakened by successive storms. the bridge was no longer safe.
(1) weakened by successive storms so that the bridge was no longer safe.
(2) although weakened by successive storms, yet the bridge was no longer safe.
(3) weakened by successive storms, the bridge was no longer safe.
(4) having been weakened the bridge by successive storms, it was being unsafe.

### 68. choose the option that correctly joins the given sentences:- the grass was very wet. we couldn’t sit on it.
(1) the grass was very wet for sitting.
(2) the grass was so wet that we couldn’t sit on it.
(3) the grass was too wet so that cannot sit
(4) the grass was very wet but we couldn’t sit on it.

### 69. change the degrees of adjective as directed :- shweta is the best girl in our class (comparative)
(1) no other girl as best as shweta in our class
(2) shweta is the best than all other girls in our class
(3) few girls in our class are better as shweta is
(4) shweta is better than any other girl in our class

### 70. change the degrees of adjective as directed :- nainital is cooler than any other hill station at this time of the year. (positive degree)
(1) no other hill station is as cool as nainital at this time of the year.
(2) nainital is the coolest hill station at this time of the year.
(3) nainital is cooler than any at this time of the year
(4) at this time nainital cooler.

### 71. transform the following sentences as directed :- he is kinder than any man i have ever met. (superlative)
(1) he is kinder man than all.
(2) he is the kindest man than any man met by me.
(3) he is the kindest man (that) i have ever met.
(4) he is a kind man than all others.

### 72. transform the following sentences as directed :- the scene that i witnessed today was horrifying compared to what i had seen before.(comparative)
(1) the scene that i witnessed today was more horrifying than what i had seen before.
(2) the scene that i witnessed today was horrifies than any other.
(3) the scene was so horrifying.
(4) the scene that i witnessed today horrified me like never before.

### 73. choose the correct phonetic transcription and the primary stress mark: mechanism
(1) / 'mekənɪzəm /
(2) / 'mækənɪzm /
(3) / mə'kænɪzəm /
(4) / 'mækənɪsm /

### 74. choose the correct phonetic transcription and the primary stress mark: church
(1) / tʃʌtʃ /
(2) / 'tʃə:tʃ /
(3) / 'tʃɜ:tʃ /
(4) / 'tʃɜ:tʃ /

### 75. choose the correct phonetic transcription and the primary stress mark: dictation
(1) / di:k'teɪʃn /
(2) / dɪk'teɪʃən /
(3) / 'dɪkteɪʃn /
(4) / dɪk'teɪʃn /

### 76. choose the correct phonetic transcription and the primary stress mark: photography
(1) / fə'tɒgrəfi /
(2) / fə'tɔːgrəfi /
(3) / fə'tɒgrəfi /
(4) / fəʊtə'græfi /

### 77. choose the correct phonetic transcription and the primary stress mark: beautiful
(1) / 'bjuːtɪfʊl /
(2) / bjuːtɪ'fʊl /
(3) / 'bjuːtɪfl /
(4) / biː'uːtɪ'fʊl /

### 78. choose the correct phonetic transcription and the primary stress mark: picture
(1) / 'pɪktʃə /
(2) / 'pɪktʃər /
(3) / pɪk'tʃə /
(4) / 'pɪktʃuə /

### 79. Choose the correct symbol for the underlined consonant/vowel sound:-
cheerful
(1) th
(2) θ
(3) ch
(4) tʃ

### 80. Choose the correct symbol for the underlined consonant/vowel sound:-
mother
(1) θ
(2) ð
(3) th
(4) d

### 81. choose the correct meaning of the phrase given from the options provided :- to draw a line
(1) to be stern
(2) to fix a limit
(3) to caution someone
(4) to insult someone

### 82. choose the correct meaning of the phrase given from the options provided :- to break the ice
(1) to be very strong
(2) to blast a quarrel
(3) to break an awkward silence
(4) to become cool

### 83. choose the correct meaning of the phrase given from the options provided:- a raw deal
(1) unjust treatment
(2) unripe statement
(3) early stage of business
(4) contract not finally decided

### 84. choose the correct meaning of the phrase given from the options provided:- spick and span
(1) lean and thin
(2) hale and hearty
(3) honest and true
(4) neat and clean

### 85. Replace the underlined idiom/phrase with the option that best completes its meaning :-
It will be wise on your part to _let bygones be bygones_
(1) resist the past
(2) revive the past
(3) ignore the past
(4) recollect the past

### 86. Replace the underlined idiom/phrase with the option that best completes its meaning:-
The politician was able to sway the mob with his _gift of the gab_.
(1) abundance of promises
(2) persuasive speech
(3) political insight
(4) natural style of speaking

### 87. Replace the underlined idiom/phrase with the option that best completes its meaning :-
At parties he is always _in high spirits_.
(1) talkative
(2) drunk
(3) uncontrollable
(4) cheerful

### 88. Replace the underlined idiom/phrase with the option that best completes its meaning :-
He was _in the doldrums_ after the quarrel with the brother.
(1) jubilant
(2) aggressive
(3) sad and depressed
(4) assertive

### 89. Replace the underlined idiom/phrase with the option that best completes its meaning :-
One cannot understand the themes in the poetry of Shelley unless one _reads between the lines_.
(1) reads alternative lines
(2) discovers hidden meaning
(3) read in inattentively
(4) read cursorily

### 90. Replace the underlined idiom/phrase with the option that best completes its meaning :-
He promised to stand by me _through thick and thin_.
(1) under no condition
(2) in good conditions
(3) in all conditions
(4) in bad conditions

### 91. Choose the correct symbol for the underlined consonant/vowel sound :-
bone
(1) / əʊ /
(2) / ɔː /
(3) / aʊ /
(4) / ɒ /

### 92. Choose the correct symbol for the underlined consonant/vowel sound:-
/ export
(1) / ɪ /
(2) / e /
(3) / æ /
(4) / ə /

### 93. Identify the use of given symbol in one of the following words :-
/ ʒ /
(1) major
(2) garage
(3) pleasure
(4) function

### 94. Identify the use of given symbols in one of the following words :-
/ uə /
(1) could
(2) tooth
(3) full
(4) doer

### 95. Identify the use of given symbols in one of the following words :-
/ eə /
(1) chair
(2) dear
(3) heat
(4) table

### 96. choose the correct pattern of the following sentence from the options provided :- all his friends are trustworthy.
(1) s v a
(2) s v c
(3) s v o
(4) s v o o

### 97. choose the correct pattern of the following sentence from the options provided :- they all wished him a safe journey.
(1) s v o c
(2) s v o o
(3) s v o a
(4) s v c o

### 98. choose the correct pattern of the following sentence from the options provided :- i want to see you happy.
(1) s v o o
(2) s v o a
(3) s v o c
(4) s o v c

### 99. choose the correct pattern of the following sentence from the options provided :- she doesn’t look her age.
(1) s v c
(2) s v a
(3) s v o
(4) s v

### 100. choose the correct pattern of the following sentence from the options provided :- the medicine tastes horrible.
(1) s v
(2) s v o
(3) s v a
(4) s v c

### 101. choose the correct structure of the given noun phrase in terms of m h m. the second train disaster to occur this fortnight.
(1) h m m
(2) m m h
(3) m h m
(4) h h m

### 102. choose the correct structure of the given noun phrase in terms of m h m. girls in pretty dresses.
(1) m h m
(2) h m
(3) h m m
(4) m m h

### 103. choose the correct structure of the given noun phrase in terms of m h m. the second tallest building.
(1) m h
(2) m m h
(3) h m m
(4) m h m

### 104. choose the correct structure of the given noun phrase in terms of m h m. current inflation
(1) m m
(2) m h
(3) h
(4) m

### 105. choose the word nearest in meaning to the given word: fame
(1) reputation
(2) glory
(3) respect
(4) frail

### 106. choose the word nearest in meaning to the given word: demise
(1) expiry
(2) cripple
(3) rest
(4) death

### 107. choose the word nearest in meaning to the given word: secluded
(1) retire
(2) hidden
(3) sequestered
(4) buried

### 108. choose the word nearest in meaning to the given word: unfair
(1) dishonest
(2) unjust
(3) unlucky
(4) particular

### 109. choose the word that is opposite in meaning to the given word. modern
(1) obsolete
(2) primitive
(3) ancient
(4) normal

### 110. choose the word that is opposite in meaning to the given word. queer
(1) ordinary
(2) common
(3) usual
(4) normal

### 111. choose the word that is opposite in meaning to the given word. humble
(1) vain
(2) rich
(3) brazen
(4) immodest

### 112. choose the word that is opposite in meaning to the given word. real
(1) fanciful
(2) illusive
(3) imaginary
(4) assumed

### 113. identify the literary device used: roll on thou deep and dark blue ocean-roll !
(1) hyperbole
(2) metaphor
(3) apostrophe
(4) simile

### 114. identify the literary device used: “their best riches ignorance of wealth”
(1) hyperbole
(2) pun
(3) alliteration
(4) oxymoron

### 115. identify the literary device used: season of mists and mellow fruitfulness close bosom friend of the maturing sun.
(1) metonymy
(2) personification
(3) epigram
(4) synecdoche

### 116. identify the literary device used: “ the ploughman homeward ploughs his weary way “
(1) simile
(2) consonance
(3) transferred epithet
(4) irony

### 117. identify the literary device used: robert browning’s “my last duchess “ is a
(1) soliloquy
(2) epilogue
(3) epitaph
(4) dramatic monologue

### 118. identify the literary device used: a story with mystery and terror usually built around a gloomy supernatural surrounding is a
(1) buildings roman
(2) gothic tale
(3) fable
(4) pastoral elegy

### 119. read the following passage and answer the questions that follow by choosing from the given options :
a pioneering scheme has started recently in southampton on england’s south coast to educate motorists who have been convicted of drunken driving. the penalty for drunken driving might be the loss of driving license and a heavy fine. but under the new scheme, convicted drivers do not pay the fine. instead they have to attend eight training sessions-one a week organized by the local authority probation service. designed to demonstrate the damage alcohol can do, the scheme was devised by senior probation officer john cook. he said about a quarter of the people who came to him had a drink problem., but had not realized how much they were drinking. one way of getting the message across was to make the drivers pour out their usual ration of alcohol and then measure it. almost every one pours out not a single measure but a double at least an example of how easy it is to have more than just one drink and to encourage other people to do the same. the instructors on the course are giving clinical evidence of the effects of alcohol on the body and brain. the sober truth is that drinking badly affects driving skills, although the drinker might like to believe otherwise.
ques: the southampton scheme requires convicted drivers
(1) to pay a heavy fine
(2) to attend eight driving sessions-one a week
(3) to undergo a probation service
(4) to surrender their driving license

### 120. read the following passage and answer the questions that follow by choosing from the given options :
a pioneering scheme has started recently in southampton on england’s south coast to educate motorists who have been convicted of drunken driving. the penalty for drunken driving might be the loss of driving license and a heavy fine. but under the new scheme, convicted drivers do not pay the fine. instead they have to attend eight training sessions-one a week organized by the local authority probation service. designed to demonstrate the damage alcohol can do, the scheme was devised by senior probation officer john cook. he said about a quarter of the people who came to him had a drink problem., but had not realized how much they were drinking. one way of getting the message across was to make the drivers pour out their usual ration of alcohol and then measure it. almost every one pours out not a single measure but a double at least an example of how easy it is to have more than just one drink and to encourage other people to do the same. the instructors on the course are giving clinical evidence of the effects of alcohol on the body and brain. the sober truth is that drinking badly affects driving skills, although the drinker might like to believe otherwise.
ques: john cook devised the scheme
(1) as a demonstration technique for driving
(2) to demonstrate the harmful effects of alcohol
(3) to show that southampton was concerned about drivers
(4) to prove that alcohol does influence driving

### 121. read the following passage and answer the questions that follow by choosing from the given options :
a pioneering scheme has started recently in southampton on england’s south coast to educate motorists who have been convicted of drunken driving. the penalty for drunken driving might be the loss of driving license and a heavy fine. but under the new scheme, convicted drivers do not pay the fine. instead they have to attend eight training sessions-one a week organized by the local authority probation service. designed to demonstrate the damage alcohol can do, the scheme was devised by senior probation officer john cook. he said about a quarter of the people who came to him had a drink problem., but had not realized how much they were drinking. one way of getting the message across was to make the drivers pour out their usual ration of alcohol and then measure it. almost every one pours out not a single measure but a double at least an example of how easy it is to have more than just one drink and to encourage other people to do the same. the instructors on the course are giving clinical evidence of the effects of alcohol on the body and brain. the sober truth is that drinking badly affects driving skills, although the drinker might like to believe otherwise.
ques: the problem with a quarter of the people who went to john cook was that they
(1) they did not want to stop drinking
(2) were unaware of the fact that they could get drunk
(3) would not admit that they had a drinking problem
(4) did not know how much they were drinking

### 122. read the following passage and answer the questions that follow by choosing from the given options :
a pioneering scheme has started recently in southampton on england’s south coast to educate motorists who have been convicted of drunken driving. the penalty for drunken driving might be the loss of driving license and a heavy fine. but under the new scheme, convicted drivers do not pay the fine. instead they have to attend eight training sessions-one a week organized by the local authority probation service. designed to demonstrate the damage alcohol can do, the scheme was devised by senior probation officer john cook. he said about a quarter of the people who came to him had a drink problem., but had not realized how much they were drinking. one way of getting the message across was to make the drivers pour out their usual ration of alcohol and then measure it. almost every one pours out not a single measure but a double at least an example of how easy it is to have more than just one drink and to encourage other people to do the same. the instructors on the course are giving clinical evidence of the effects of alcohol on the body and brain. the sober truth is that drinking badly affects driving skills, although the drinker might like to believe otherwise.
ques: most drivers start off with at least
(1) a double measure
(2) a single measure
(3) a little less than a single measure
(4) two doubles

### 123. read the following passage and answer the questions that follow by choosing from the given options :
a pioneering scheme has started recently in southampton on england’s south coast to educate motorists who have been convicted of drunken driving. the penalty for drunken driving might be the loss of driving license and a heavy fine. but under the new scheme, convicted drivers do not pay the fine. instead they have to attend eight training sessions-one a week organized by the local authority probation service. designed to demonstrate the damage alcohol can do, the scheme was devised by senior probation officer john cook. he said about a quarter of the people who came to him had a drink problem., but had not realized how much they were drinking. one way of getting the message across was to make the drivers pour out their usual ration of alcohol and then measure it. almost every one pours out not a single measure but a double at least an example of how easy it is to have more than just one drink and to encourage other people to do the same. the instructors on the course are giving clinical evidence of the effects of alcohol on the body and brain. the sober truth is that drinking badly affects driving skills, although the drinker might like to believe otherwise.
ques: the truth is that alcohol
(1) does not affect the body but only the brain
(2) affects only the brain
(3) affects the body and brain
(4) has no effect on the body or the brain

### 124. identify the following literary movements : primarily a religious movement during the victorian age associated with john henry newan
(1) aesthetic movement
(2) oxford movement
(3) chicago movement
(4) existentialism

### 125. identify the following literary movements : walter pater was the initiator of:
(1) aestheticism
(2) classicism
(3) romanticism
(4) absurdism

### 126. identify the following literary movements : poetry distinguished by its far fetched images and conceit is
(1) symbolic
(2) metaphysical
(3) romantic
(4) modernist

### 127. rabindranath tagore was awarded the nobel prize for
(1) gora
(2) home and the world
(3) the wreck
(4) gitanjali

### 128. 'obituary' is a poem written by
(1) taru dutt
(2) a. k. ramanujan
(3) nissim ezekiel
(4) kamala das

### 129. the fictitious locale created by r k narayan in his novel is :
(1) kanthapura
(2) jhumntalaiya
(3) malgudi
(4) wessex

### 130. Cry the Peacock and Voices in the City are novels written by
(1) shashi deshpande
(2) anita desai
(3) rama mehta
(4) kamala markandya

### 131. choose the option not true of grammar translation method
(1) vocabulary and grammar are emphasized
(2) the target language is made clear by translating it into the student’s native language
(3) literary language is studied as it is considered superior to spoken language.
(4) grammar is taught inductively.

### 132. which of the following not an attribute of the direct method?
(1) emphasis on oral language
(2) intensive speech practice with training in phonetics
(3) emphasis on rules, principles and definitions
(4) exclusive use of the target language

### 133. which method consists of exposing the student to samples of the target language and encouraging him to imitate and respond?
(1) structural method
(2) grammar translation method
(3) communicative language teaching
(4) direct method

### 134. which of the following not an attribute of the structural situational method?
(1) structures are carefully selected and graded
(2) structures are taught through situations, actions, gestures, pictures etc.
(3) teachers gives choral, groups and individual oral drills
(4) languages is not considered a matter of habit formation

### 135. choose the correct sequence of presenting structures in class from the options given below. 1. contracting two or more structures 2. giving examples of the new structure 3. practicing the structures through different situation 4. showing the meaning of the new structure visually
(1) 3 4 2 1
(2) 2 4 3 1
(3) 1 2 4 3
(4) 2 1 3 4

### 136. choose the option not true of the audio-lingual method
(1) language learning is a process of habit formation
(2) speech is more basic to language than written form
(3) teachers provide students with models of target language
(4) teacher’s instruction are given in the student's native language

### 137. choose the option not true of the communicative language teaching
(1) the focus is on the real language use.
(2) the teacher acts as a facilitator of the communicative activities
(3) errors are not tolerated at the initial stages
(4) the teacher finally evaluates not only the students fluency, but also their accuracy

### 138. who reads the prose text in a class when introducing it?
(1) the teacher
(2) the students by turn
(3) the students in chorus
(4) the students silently

### 139. what should a teacher not do while teaching a prose text in a class?
(1) explain all the new words included in the text.
(2) leave out words whose meaning can be understood from the context
(3) explain key word essential for understanding a text
(4) ask students to consult a dictionary at home and come prepared

### 140. select the level of comprehension questions which helps most in developing a learner’s critical faculties.
(1) reorganizational level
(2) interpretative and inferential level
(3) literal level
(4) dysfunctional level

### 141. which way of reading is used to find a particular piece of information in a text ?
(1) skimming
(2) scanning
(3) skipping
(4) drilling

### 142. the primary objective of teaching poetry is :
(1) providing delight
(2) improving pronunciation
(3) enhancing vocabulary
(4) strengthening grammar

### 143. according to the descriptive approach grammar tells us
(1) how the language is used
(2) how the language ought to be used
(3) how the language must be used
(4) how the language may be used

### 144. choose the option which is not true of functional grammar
(1) it initially presents some examples and then infers the rule or principle
(2) it first states a definition or rule and then gives an example as illustration
(3) it concentrates on practice of correct forms and avoids the use of abstract and technical terminology
(4) it conceives grammar as a practical application of specific forms

### 145. select the option which is not included in the structural word category
(1) adverb
(2) conjunction
(3) interjection
(4) determiner

### 146. which of the following is not an attribute of writing?
(1) writing allows time for reflection
(2) writing requires a higher standard that that of speech
(3) writing errors are ignored
(4) writing call for more work by the teacher after the lesson

### 147. which of the following is not true of free composition?
(1) learners produce the ideas as well as the language
(2) learners express the given ideas
(3) learners verbalize their thought directly
(4) learners try to write without guidance

### 148. which of the tests are based on the behavioral view of language learning?
(1) discrete item tests
(2) global tests
(3) traditional tests
(4) both global tests and traditional tests

### 149. global tests test a student's
(1) vocabulary
(2) word order
(3) reading comprehension
(4) all-round knowledge of the language

### 150. the test in which the student has to fill-in every 5th, 6th, or 7th, etc. word removed from the passage is called
(1) open-ended test
(2) cloze test
(3) intrusion test
(4) correction test