---
title: Literary Terms and Figures of Speech
tags:
  - glossary
  - literature
  - movement-study
  - period-study
  - questions
  - syllabus
---

## Literary Terms and Figures of Speech

### Alliteration
**alliteration:** Alliteration is the repetition of a speech sound in a sequence of nearby words. Usually the term is applied only to consonants, and only when the recurrent sound is made emphatic because it begins a word or a stressed syllable within a word. In Old English **alliterative meter**, alliteration is the principal organizing device of the verse line: the verse is unrhymed; each line is divided into two half-lines of two strong stresses by a decisive pause, or *caesura*; and at least one, and usually both, of the two stressed syllables in the first half-line alliterate with the first stressed syllable of the second half-line. (In this type of versification a vowel was considered to alliterate with any other vowel.) A number of Middle English poems, such as William Langland’s *Piers Plowman* and the romance *Sir Gawain and the Green Knight*, both written in the fourteenth century, continued to use and play variations upon the old alliterative meter. (See *strong-stress meters*.) In the opening line of *Piers Plowman*, for example, all four of the stressed syllables alliterate:
> In a sómer séson, when sóft was the sónne….

In later English versification, however, alliteration is used only for special stylistic effects, such as to reinforce the meaning, to link related words, or to provide tone color and enhance the palpability of enunciating the words. An example is the repetition of the s, th, and w consonants in Shakespeare’s Sonnet 30:
> When to the sessions of sweet silent thought
> I summon up remembrance of things past,
> I sigh the lack of many a thing I sought
> And with old woes new wail my dear time’s waste….

Various other repetitions of speech sounds are identified by special terms:
**Consonance** is the repetition of a sequence of two or more consonants, but with a change in the intervening vowel: live-love, lean-alone, pitter-patter. W. H. Auden’s poem of the 1930s, “‘O where are you going?’ said reader to rider,” makes prominent use of this device...
**Assonance** is the repetition of identical or similar vowels—especially in stressed syllables—in a sequence of nearby words. Note the recurrent long i in the opening lines of Keats’ “Ode on a Grecian Urn” (1820):
> Thou still unravished bride of quietness,
> Thou foster child of silence and slow time….

The richly assonantal effect at the beginning of William Collins’ “Ode to Evening” (1747) is achieved by a patterned sequence of changing vowels:
> If aught of oaten stop or pastoral song,
> May hope, chaste Eve, to soothe thy pensive ear….

For a special case of the repetition of vowels and consonants in combination, see *rhyme*.

### Ballad
**ballad:** A short definition of the **popular ballad** (also called the **folk ballad** or **traditional ballad**) is that it is a song, transmitted orally, which tells a story. Ballads are thus the narrative species of *folk songs*, which originate, and are communicated orally, among illiterate or only partly literate people. In all probability the initial version of a ballad was composed by a single author, but he or she is unknown; and since each singer who learns and repeats an oral ballad is apt to introduce changes in both the text and the tune, it exists in many variant forms. Typically, the popular ballad is dramatic, condensed, and impersonal: the narrator begins with the climactic episode, tells the story tersely in action and dialogue (sometimes by means of dialogue alone), and tells it without self-reference or the expression of personal attitudes or feelings.
The most common stanza form—called the **ballad stanza**—is a *quatrain* in alternate four- and three-stress lines; usually only the second and fourth lines rhyme. This is the form of “Sir Patrick Spens”; the first stanza also exemplifies the abrupt opening of the typical ballad, and the manner of proceeding by third-person narration, curtly sketched setting and action, sharp transition, and spare dialogue:
> The king sits in Dumferling towne,
> Drinking the blude-red wine:
> “O whar will I get a guid sailor,
> To sail this schip of mine?”

Many ballads employ set formulas (which helped the singer remember the course of the song) including (1) stock descriptive phrases like “blood-red wine” and “milk-white steed,” (2) a *refrain* in each stanza (“Edward,” “Lord Randall”), and (3) **incremental repetition**, in which a line or stanza is repeated, but with an addition that advances the story (“Lord Randall,” “Child Waters”). See *oral poetry*.
Although many traditional ballads probably originated in the later Middle Ages, they were not collected and printed until the eighteenth century, first in England, then in Germany. In 1765 Thomas Percy published his *Reliques of Ancient English Poetry* which, although most of the contents had been revised in the style of Percy’s era, did much to inaugurate widespread interest in folk literature. The basic modern collection is Francis J. Child’s *English and Scottish Popular Ballads* (1882–98), which includes 305 ballads, many of them in variant versions. Bertrand H. Bronson has edited *The Traditional Tunes of the Child Ballads* (4 vols., 1959–72). Popular ballads are still being sung—and collected, now with the help of an electronic recorder—in the British Isles and remote rural areas of America. To the songs that early settlers brought with them from Great Britain, America has added native forms of the ballad, such as those sung by lumberjacks, cowboys, laborers, and social protesters. A number of recent folk singers, including Woody Guthrie, Bob Dylan, and Joan Baez, themselves compose ballads; most of these, however, such as “The Ballad of Bonnie and Clyde” (about a notorious gangster and his moll), are closer to the journalistic “broadside ballad” than to the archaic and heroic mode of the popular ballads in the Child collection.
A **broadside ballad** is a ballad that was printed on one side of a single sheet (called a “broadside”), dealt with a current event or person or issue, and was sung to a well-known tune. Beginning with the sixteenth century, these broadsides were hawked in the streets or at country fairs in Great Britain.
The traditional ballad has greatly influenced the form and style of lyric poetry in general. It has also engendered the **literary ballad**, which is a narrative poem written in deliberate imitation of the form, language, and spirit of the traditional ballad. In Germany, some major literary ballads were composed in the latter eighteenth century, including G. A. Bürger’s very popular “Lenore” (1774)—which soon became widely read and influential in an English translation—and Goethe’s “Erlkönig” (1782). In England, some of the best literary ballads were composed in the *Romantic Period*: Coleridge’s “Rime of the Ancient Mariner” (which, however, is much longer and has a much more elaborate plot than the folk ballad), Walter Scott’s “Proud Maisie,” and Keats’ “La Belle Dame sans Merci.” In his *Lyrical Ballads* of 1798, Wordsworth begins “We Are Seven” by introducing a narrator as an agent and first-person teller of the story—“I met a little cottage girl”—which is probably one reason he called the collection “lyrical ballads.” Coleridge’s “Ancient Mariner,” on the other hand, of which the first version also appeared in *Lyrical Ballads*, opens with the abrupt and impersonal third-person narration of the traditional ballad:
> It is an ancient Mariner
> And he stoppeth one of three….

### Dramatic Monologue
**dramatic monologue:** A **monologue** is a lengthy speech by a single person. In a play, when a character utters a monologue that expresses his or her private thoughts, it is called a *soliloquy*. **Dramatic monologue**, however, does not designate a component in a play, but a type of lyric poem that was perfected by Robert Browning. In its fullest form, as represented in Browning’s “My Last Duchess,” “The Bishop Orders His Tomb,” “Andrea del Sarto,” and many other poems, the dramatic monologue has the following features: (1) A single person, who is patently not the poet, utters the speech that makes up the whole of the poem, in a specific situation at a critical moment: the Duke is negotiating with an emissary for a second wife; the Bishop lies dying; Andrea once more attempts wistfully to believe his wife’s lies. (2) This person addresses and interacts with one or more other people; but we know of the auditors’ presence, and what they say and do, only from clues in the discourse of the single speaker. (3) The main principle controlling the poet’s choice and formulation of what the lyric speaker says is to reveal to the reader, in a way that enhances its interest, the speaker’s temperament and character.
In monologues such as “Soliloquy of the Spanish Cloister” and “Caliban upon Setebos,” Browning omits the second feature, the presence of a silent auditor; but features 1 and 3 are the necessary conditions of a dramatic monologue. The third feature—the focus on self-revelation—serves to distinguish a dramatic monologue from its near relation, the **dramatic lyric**, which is also a monologue uttered in an identifiable situation at a dramatic moment. John Donne’s “The Canonization” and “The Flea” (1613), for example, are dramatic lyrics that lack only one feature of the dramatic monologue: the focus of interest is primarily on the speaker’s elaborately ingenious argument, rather than on the character he inadvertently reveals in the course of arguing. And although Wordsworth’s “Tintern Abbey” (1798) is spoken by one person to a silent auditor (his sister) in a specific situation at a significant moment in his life, it is not a dramatic monologue proper, both because we are invited to identify the speaker with the poet himself, and because the organizing principle and focus of interest is not the revelation of the speaker’s distinctive temperament, but the evolution of his observations, memories, and thoughts toward the resolution of an emotional problem.
Tennyson wrote “Ulysses” (1842) and other dramatic monologues, and the form has been used by H. D. (Hilda Doolittle), Amy Lowell, Robert Frost, E. A. Robinson, Ezra Pound, Robert Lowell, and other poets of the twentieth century. The best-known modern instance is T. S. Eliot’s “The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock” (1915).

### Elegy
**elegy:** In Greek and Roman times, “elegy” denoted any poem written in **elegiac meter** (alternating hexameter and pentameter lines). The term was also used, however, to refer to the subject matter of change and loss frequently expressed in the elegiac verse form, especially in complaints about love. In accordance with this latter usage, “The Wanderer,” “The Seafarer,” and other poems in Old English on the transience of all worldly things are even now called elegies. In Europe and England the word continued to have a variable application through the Renaissance. John Donne’s elegies, written in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, are love poems, although they relate to the sense of elegy as lament, in that many of them emphasize mutability and loss. In the seventeenth century the term **elegy** began to be limited to its most common present usage: a formal and sustained lament in verse for the death of a particular person, usually ending in a consolation. Examples are the medieval poem *Pearl* and Chaucer’s *Book of the Duchess* (elegies in the mode of *dream allegory*); Alfred, Lord Tennyson’s *In Memoriam* (1850), on the death of Arthur Hallam; and W. H. Auden’s “In Memory of W. B. Yeats” (1940). Occasionally the term is used in its older and broader sense, for somber meditations on mortality such as Thomas Gray’s “Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard” (1757), and the *Duino Elegies* (1912–22) of the German poet Rainer Maria Rilke on the transience both of poets and of the earthly objects they write poems about.
The **dirge** is also a versified expression of grief on the occasion of a particular person’s death, but differs from the elegy in that it is short, is less formal, and is usually represented as a text to be sung; examples are Shakespeare’s “Full Fathom Five Thy Father Lies” and William Collins’ “A Song from Shakespeare’s *Cymbeline*” (1749). **Threnody** is now used mainly as an equivalent for “dirge,” and **monody** for an elegy or dirge which is presented as the utterance of a single person. John Milton describes his “Lycidas” (1638) in the subtitle as a “monody” in which “the Author bewails a learned Friend,” and Matthew Arnold called his elegy on A. H. Clough “Thyrsis: A Monody” (1866).
An important subtype is the **pastoral elegy**, which represents both the poet and the one he mourns—who is usually also a poet—as shepherds (the Latin word for shepherd is “pastor”). This poetic form was originated by the Sicilian Greek poet Theocritus, was continued by the Roman Virgil, was developed in various European countries during the Renaissance, and remained current in English poetry through the nineteenth century. Notable English pastoral elegies are Spenser’s “Astrophel,” on the death of Sir Philip Sidney (1595); Milton’s “Lycidas” (1638); Shelley’s “Adonais” (1821); and in the Victorian age, Arnold’s “Thyrsis.”

### Epic and Mock epic
**epic:** In its strict sense the term **epic** or **heroic poem** is applied to a work that meets at least the following criteria: it is a long verse narrative on a serious subject, told in a formal and elevated style, and centered on a heroic or quasi-divine figure on whose actions depends the fate of a tribe, a nation, or (in the instance of John Milton’s *Paradise Lost*) the human race.
There is a standard distinction between **traditional** and **literary epics**. “Traditional epics” (also called “folk epics” or “primary epics”) were written versions of what had originally been oral poems about a tribal or national hero during a warlike age. (See *oral poetry*.) Among these are the *Iliad* and *Odyssey* that the Greeks ascribed to Homer; the Anglo-Saxon *Beowulf*; the French *Chanson de Roland* and the Spanish *Poema del Cid* in the twelfth century; and the thirteenth-century German epic *Nibelungenlied*. “Literary epics” were composed by individual poetic craftsmen in deliberate imitation of the traditional form. Of this kind is Virgil’s Latin poem the *Aeneid*, which later served as the chief model for Milton’s literary epic *Paradise Lost* (1667). *Paradise Lost* in turn became, in the *Romantic Period*, a model for John Keats’ fragmentary epic *Hyperion*, as well as for William Blake’s several epics, or “prophetic books” (*The Four Zoas*, *Milton*, *Jerusalem*), which translated into Blake’s own mythic terms the biblical narrative that had been Milton’s subject.
The epic was ranked by Aristotle as second only to tragedy, and by many Renaissance critics as the highest of all genres. The literary epic is certainly the most ambitious of poetic enterprises, making immense demands on a poet’s knowledge, invention, and skill to sustain the scope, grandeur, and authority of a poem that tends to encompass the world of its day and a large portion of its learning. Despite numerous attempts in many languages over nearly three thousand years, we possess no more than a half-dozen such poems of indubitable greatness. Literary epics are highly conventional compositions which usually share the following features, derived by way of the *Aeneid* from the traditional epics of Homer:
1.  The hero is a figure of great national or even cosmic importance...
2.  The setting of the poem is ample in scale, and may be worldwide, or even larger...
3.  The action involves extraordinary deeds in battle...or a long, arduous, and dangerous journey...
4.  In these great actions the gods and other supernatural beings take an interest or an active part—the Olympian gods in Homer, and Jehovah, Christ, and the angels in *Paradise Lost*. These supernatural agents were in the *Neoclassic Age* called the **machinery**...
5.  An epic poem is a ceremonial performance, and is narrated in a ceremonial style which is deliberately distanced from ordinary speech and proportioned to the grandeur and formality of the heroic subject and architecture...

There are also widely used **epic conventions**, or formulas, in the choice and ordering of episodes; prominent among them are these features, as exemplified in *Paradise Lost*:
1. The narrator begins by stating his **argument**, or epic theme, invokes a **muse** or guiding spirit to inspire him in his great undertaking, then addresses to the muse the **epic question**, the answer to which inaugurates the narrative proper...
2. The narrative starts **in medias res** (“in the middle of things”), at a critical point in the action...
3. There are **catalogues** of some of the principal characters, introduced in formal detail...

The term “epic” is often applied, by extension, to narratives which differ in many respects from this model but manifest the epic spirit and grandeur in the scale, the scope, and the profound human importance of their subjects... In a still more extended application, the Marxist critic Georg Lukács used the term **bourgeois epic** for all novels which, in his view, reflect the social reality of their capitalist age on a broad scale.

**mock epic** or **mock-heroic** poem is that type of parody which imitates, in a sustained way, both the elaborate form and the ceremonious style of the epic genre, but applies it to narrate a commonplace or trivial subject matter. In a masterpiece of this type, *The Rape of the Lock* (1714), Alexander Pope views through the grandiose epic perspective a quarrel between the belles and elegants of his day over the theft of a lady’s curl. The story includes such elements of traditional epic protocol as supernatural machinery, a voyage on board ship, a visit to the underworld, and a heroically scaled battle between the sexes—although with metaphors, hatpins, and snuff for weapons. The term mock-heroic is often applied to other dignified poetic forms which are purposely mismatched to a lowly subject; for example, to Thomas Gray’s comic “Ode on the Death of a Favorite Cat” (1748); see under *bathos and anticlimax*.

### Hyperbole
**hyperbole and understatement:** The figure of speech, or *trope*, called **hyperbole** (hıpur' bol e”: Greek for “overshooting”) is bold overstatement, or the extravagant exaggeration of fact or of possibility. It may be used either for serious or ironic or comic effect. Iago says gloatingly of Othello (III. iii. 330ff.):
> Not poppy nor mandragora,
> Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world,
> Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep
> Which thou ow’dst yesterday.

Famed examples in the seventeenth century are Ben Jonson’s gallantly hyperbolic compliments to his lady in “Drink to me only with thine eyes,” and the ironic hyperboles in “To His Coy Mistress,” by which Andrew Marvell attests how infinitely slowly his “vegetable love should grow”—if he had “but world enough and time.” The “tall talk” or **tall tale** of the American West is a form of mainly comic hyperbole. There is the story of a cowboy in an eastern restaurant who ordered a steak well done. “Do you call this well done?” he roared at the server. “I’ve seen critters hurt worse than that get well!”
The contrary figure is **understatement** (the Greek term is **meiosis**, “lessening”), which deliberately represents something as very much less in magnitude or importance than it really is, or is ordinarily considered to be. The effect is usually ironic... A special form of understatement is **litotes** (Greek for “plain” or “simple”), the assertion of an affirmative by negating its contrary: “He’s not the brightest man in the world” meaning “He is stupid.”

### Onomatopoeia
**onomatopoeia:** Onomatopoeia, sometimes called **echoism**, is used both in a narrow and in a broad sense.
1. In the narrow and most common use, onomatopoeia designates a word, or a combination of words, whose sound seems to duplicate the sound it denotes: “hiss,” “buzz,” “rattle,” “bang.” ... Two lines of Alfred, Lord Tennyson’s “Come Down, O Maid” (1847) are often cited as a skillful instance of onomatopoeia:
> The moan of doves in immemorial elms,
> And murmuring of innumerable bees.
2. In the broad sense, “onomatopoeia” is applied to words or passages which seem to correspond to, or to strongly suggest, what they denote in any way whatever—in size, movement, tactile feel, duration, or force, as well as sound (see *sound symbolism*). Alexander Pope recommends such extended verbal mimicry in his *Essay on Criticism* (1711) when he says that “the sound should seem an echo of the sense,” and goes on to illustrate his maxim...:
> When Ajax strives some rock’s vast weight to throw,
> The line too labors, and the words move slow;
> Not so when swift Camilla scours the plain,
> Flies o’er th’ unbending corn, and skims along the main.

### Personification
Another figure related to metaphor is **personification**, or in the Greek term, **prosopopeia**, in which either an inanimate object or an abstract concept is spoken of as though it were endowed with life or with human attributes or feelings (compare *pathetic fallacy*). Milton wrote in *Paradise Lost* (IX. 1002–3), as Adam bit into the fatal apple,
> Sky lowered, and muttering thunder, some sad drops
> Wept at completing of the mortal sin.

The second stanza of Keats’ “To Autumn” finely personifies the season, autumn, as a woman carrying on the rural chores of that time of year; and in *Aurora Leigh*, I. 251–52, Elizabeth Barrett Browning wrote:
> Then, land!—then, England! oh, the frosty cliffs
> Looked cold upon me.

The personification of abstract terms was standard in eighteenth-century *poetic diction*, where it sometimes became a thoughtless formula. Coleridge cited an eighteenth-century ode celebrating the invention of inoculation against smallpox that began with this *apostrophe* to the personified subject of the poem:
> Inoculation! heavenly Maid, descend!

### Proverbs
**Proverbs** are short, pithy statements of widely accepted truths about everyday life. Many proverbs are allegorical, in that the explicit statement is meant to have, by analogy or by extended reference, a general application: “a stitch in time saves nine”; “people in glass houses should not throw stones.”

### Satire and Irony
**satire:** Satire can be described as the literary art of diminishing or derogating a subject by making it ridiculous and evoking toward it attitudes of amusement, contempt, scorn, or indignation. It differs from the *comic* in that comedy evokes laughter mainly as an end in itself, while satire derides; that is, it uses laughter as a weapon, and against a butt that exists outside the work itself. That butt may be an individual (in “personal satire”), or a type of person, a class, an institution, a nation, or even (as in the Earl of Rochester’s “A Satyr against Mankind,” 1675, and much of Jonathan Swift’s *Gulliver’s Travels*, 1726, especially Book IV) the entire human race... Satire has usually been justified, by those who practice it, as a corrective of human vice and folly; Alexander Pope, for example, remarked that “those who are ashamed of nothing else are so of being ridiculous.”... Critics make a broad division between **formal** (or “direct”) **satire** and **indirect satire**. In formal satire the satiric *persona* speaks out in the first person... Two types of formal satire are commonly distinguished, taking their names from the great Roman satirists Horace and Juvenal... In **Horatian satire** the speaker is an urbane, witty, and tolerant man of the world... In **Juvenalian satire** the speaker is a serious moralist who uses a dignified and public utterance to decry modes of vice and error... Indirect satire is cast in some other literary form than that of direct address to the reader. The most common indirect form is that of a fictional narrative, in which the objects of the satire are characters who make themselves and their opinions ridiculous or obnoxious by what they think, say, and do...

**irony:** In Greek comedy the character called the **eiron** was a dissembler, who characteristically spoke in understatement and pretended to be less intelligent than he was, yet triumphed over the **alazon**—the self-deceiving and stupid braggart... In most modern critical uses of the term “irony,” there remains the root sense of dissembling, or of hiding what is actually the case; not, however, in order to deceive, but to achieve special rhetorical or artistic effects.
**Verbal irony** ... is a statement in which the meaning that a speaker implies differs sharply from the meaning that is ostensibly expressed...
Some literary works exhibit **structural irony**; that is, the author, instead of using an occasional verbal irony, introduces a structural feature that serves to sustain a duplex meaning and evaluation throughout the work. One common literary device of this sort is the invention of a **naive hero**, or else a naive narrator or spokesman...
**Sarcasm** in common parlance is sometimes used as an equivalent for irony, but it is far more useful to restrict it only to the crude and taunting use of apparent praise for dispraise: “Oh, you’re God’s great gift to women, you are!”
**Dramatic irony** involves a situation in a play or a narrative in which the audience or reader shares with the author knowledge of present or future circumstances of which a character is ignorant...
**Cosmic irony** (or “the irony of fate”) is attributed to literary works in which a deity, or else fate, is represented as though deliberately manipulating events so as to lead the protagonist to false hopes, only to frustrate and mock them...
**Romantic irony** is a term introduced by Friedrich Schlegel and other German writers of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries to designate a mode of dramatic or narrative writing in which the author builds up the illusion of representing reality, only to shatter the illusion by revealing that the author, as artist, is the creator and arbitrary manipulator of the characters and their actions.

### Simile and Metaphor
In a **simile**, a comparison between two distinctly different things is explicitly indicated by the word “like” or “as.” A simple example is Robert Burns, “O my love’s like a red, red rose.” The following simile from Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s “The Rime of the Ancient Mariner” also specifies the feature (“green”) in which icebergs are similar to emerald:
> And ice, mast-high, came floating by,
> As green as emerald.
For highly elaborated types of simile, see *conceit* and *epic simile*.

In a **metaphor**, a word or expression that in literal usage denotes one kind of thing is applied to a distinctly different kind of thing, without asserting a comparison. For example, if Burns had said “O my love is a red, red rose” he would have uttered, technically speaking, a metaphor instead of a simile... I. A. Richards introduced the name **tenor** for the subject ... and the name **vehicle** for the metaphorical term itself ... In an **implicit metaphor**, the tenor is not itself specified, but only implied... A **mixed metaphor** conjoins two or more obviously diverse metaphoric vehicles... A **dead metaphor** is one which, like “the leg of a table” or “the heart of the matter,” has been used so long and become so common that we have ceased to be aware of the discrepancy between vehicle and tenor.

### Sonnet
**sonnet:** A lyric poem consisting of a single stanza of fourteen iambic pentameter lines linked by an intricate rhyme scheme. (Refer to *meter* and *rhyme*.) There are two major patterns of rhyme in sonnets written in the English language:
1.  The **Italian** or **Petrarchan sonnet** (named after the fourteenth-century Italian poet Petrarch) falls into two main parts: an **octave** (eight lines) rhyming abbaabba followed by a **sestet** (six lines) rhyming cdecde or some variant, such as cdccdc...
2.  The Earl of Surrey and other English experimenters in the sixteenth century also developed a stanza form called the **English sonnet**, or else the **Shakespearean sonnet**, after its greatest practitioner. This sonnet falls into three quatrains and a concluding couplet: abab cdcd efef gg. There was a notable variant, the **Spenserian sonnet**, in which Spenser linked each quatrain to the next by a continuing rhyme: abab bcbc cdcd ee.

Following Petrarch’s early example, a number of Elizabethan authors arranged their poems into **sonnet sequences**, or **sonnet cycles**, in which a series of sonnets are linked together by exploring the varied aspects of a relationship between lovers, or else by indicating a development in the relationship that constitutes a kind of implicit plot.

## Literary Periods

### Renaissance
**The Renaissance**, 1500–1660. ... “Renaissance” (“rebirth”) is the name commonly applied to the period of European history following the Middle Ages; it is usually said to have begun in Italy in the late fourteenth century and to have continued, in Italy and other countries of Western Europe, through the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The development came late to England in the sixteenth century, and did not have its flowering until the Elizabethan and Jacobean periods...
**Elizabethan Age**. Strictly speaking, the period of the reign of Elizabeth I (1558–1603); the term “Elizabethan,” however, is often used loosely to refer to the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, even after the death of Elizabeth. This was a time of rapid development in English commerce, maritime power, and nationalist feeling—the defeat of the Spanish Armada occurred in 1588. It was a great (in drama the greatest) age of English literature—the age of Sir Philip Sidney, Christopher Marlowe, Edmund Spenser, William Shakespeare, Sir Walter Raleigh, Francis Bacon, Ben Jonson, and many other extraordinary writers of prose and of dramatic, lyric, and narrative poetry.

### Metaphysical
**metaphysical poets:** John Dryden said in his *Discourse Concerning Satire* (1693) that John Donne in his poetry “affects the metaphysics,” meaning that Donne employs the terminology and abstruse arguments of the medieval Scholastic philosophers. In 1779 Samuel Johnson extended the term “metaphysical” from Donne to a school of poets, in the acute and balanced critique which he incorporated in his “Life of Cowley.” The name is now applied to a group of seventeenth-century poets who, whether or not directly influenced by Donne, employ similar poetic procedures and imagery, both in secular poetry (Cleveland, Marvell, and Cowley) and in religious poetry (Herbert, Vaughan, Crashaw, and Traherne)... Donne set the metaphysical mode by writing poems which are sharply opposed to the rich mellifluousness and the idealized view of human nature and of sexual love which had constituted a central tradition in Elizabethan poetry... Instead, Donne wrote in a diction and meter modeled on the rough give-and-take of actual speech, and often organized his poems as an urgent or heated argument... He employed a subtle and often deliberately outrageous logic; he was realistic, ironic, and sometimes cynical in his treatment of the complexity of human motives, especially in the sexual relationship; and whether playful or serious, and whether writing the poetry of love or of intense religious experience, he was above all “witty,” making ingenious use of *paradox*, *pun*, and startling parallels in *simile* and *metaphor* (see *metaphysical conceit* and *wit*).

### Jacobean
**Jacobean Age.** The reign of James I (in Latin, “Jacobus”), 1603–25, which followed that of Queen Elizabeth. This was the period in prose writings of Bacon, John Donne’s sermons, Robert Burton’s *Anatomy of Melancholy*, and the King James translation of the Bible. It was also the time of Shakespeare’s greatest tragedies and tragicomedies, and of major writings by other notable poets and playwrights including Donne, Ben Jonson, Michael Drayton, Lady Mary Wroth, Sir Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher, John Webster, George Chapman, Thomas Middleton, Philip Massinger, and Elizabeth Cary, whose notable biblical drama *The Tragedy of Mariam, the Faire Queene of Jewry* was the first long play by an Englishwoman to be published.

### Neo Classical
**The Neoclassical Period**, 1660–1785...
**Restoration**. This period takes its name from the restoration of the Stuart line (Charles II) to the English throne in 1660, at the end of the Commonwealth; it is specified as lasting until 1700. The urbanity, wit, and licentiousness of the life centering on the court, in sharp contrast to the seriousness and sobriety of the earlier Puritan regime, is reflected in much of the literature of this age...
**Augustan Age**. The original Augustan Age was the brilliant literary period of Virgil, Horace, and Ovid under the Roman emperor Augustus (27 BC–AD 14). In the eighteenth century and later, however, the term was frequently applied also to the literary period in England from approximately 1700 to 1745. The leading writers of the time (such as Alexander Pope, Jonathan Swift, and Joseph Addison) themselves drew the parallel to the Roman Augustans, and deliberately imitated their literary forms and subjects, their emphasis on social concerns, and their ideals of moderation, decorum, and urbanity. (See *neoclassicism*.)...
**Age of Sensibility**. The period between the death of Alexander Pope in 1744, and 1785... An older name for this half century, the **Age of Johnson**, stresses the dominant position of Samuel Johnson (1709–84) and his literary and intellectual circle... The more recent name, “Age of Sensibility,” puts its stress on the emergence, in other writers of the 1740s and later, of new cultural attitudes, theories of literature, and types of poetry; we find in this period, for example, a growing sympathy for the Middle Ages, a vogue of *cultural primitivism*, an awakening interest in ballads and other folk literature, a turn from neoclassic “correctness” and its emphasis on judgment and restraint to an emphasis on instinct and feeling, the development of a *literature of sensibility*, and above all the exaltation by some critics of “original genius” and a “bardic” poetry of the *sublime* and visionary imagination.

### Romantic
**Romantic Period.** The Romantic Period in English literature is dated as beginning in 1785 (see *Age of Sensibility*)—or alternatively in 1789 (the outbreak of the French Revolution), or in 1798 (the publication of William Wordsworth’s and Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s *Lyrical Ballads*)—and as ending either in 1830 or else in 1832, the year in which Sir Walter Scott died and the passage of the Reform Bill signaled the political preoccupations of the Victorian era. For some prominent characteristics of the thought and writings of this remarkable and diverse literary period... see *neoclassic and romantic*.

### Victorian
**Victorian Period.** The beginning of the Victorian Period is frequently dated 1830, or alternatively 1832 (the passage of the first Reform Bill), and sometimes 1837 (the accession of Queen Victoria); it extends to the death of Victoria in 1901. Historians often subdivide the long period into three phases: **Early Victorian** (to 1848), **Mid-Victorian** (1848–70), and **Late Victorian** (1870–1901). Much writing of the period, whether imaginative or didactic, in verse or in prose, dealt with or reflected the pressing social, economic, religious, and intellectual issues and problems of that era... Among the notable poets were Alfred, Lord Tennyson, Robert Browning, Elizabeth Barrett Browning, Christina Rossetti, Matthew Arnold, and Gerard Manley Hopkins... The most prominent essayists were Thomas Carlyle, John Ruskin, Arnold, and Walter Pater; the most distinguished of many excellent novelists (this was a great age of English prose fiction) were Charlotte and Emily Brontë, Charles Dickens, William Makepeace Thackeray, Elizabeth Gaskell, George Eliot, George Meredith, Anthony Trollope, Thomas Hardy, and Samuel Butler.

### Modern
**Modern Period.** The application of the term “modern,” of course, varies with the passage of time, but it is frequently applied specifically to the literature written since the beginning of World War I in 1914; see *modernism and postmodernism*. This period has been marked by persistent and multidimensioned experiments in subject matter, form, and style, and has produced major achievements in all the literary genres. Among the notable writers are the poets W. B. Yeats, Wilfred Owen, T. S. Eliot, W. H. Auden, Robert Graves, Dylan Thomas, and Seamus Heaney; the novelists Joseph Conrad, James Joyce, D. H. Lawrence, Dorothy Richardson, Virginia Woolf, E. M. Forster, Aldous Huxley, Graham Greene, Doris Lessing, and Nadine Gordimer; the dramatists G. B. Shaw, Sean O’Casey, Noel Coward, Samuel Beckett, Harold Pinter, Caryl Churchill, Brendan Behan, Frank McGuinness, and Tom Stoppard.

### Post-Modern
**Postmodern Period** is applied to the era from the end of World War II (1945) to approximately 1990. See *modernism and postmodernism* and, for innovations during the postmodern period in critical theory and practice, *poststructuralism*.

## Literary Movements

### Romanticism
The prevailing attitude favored innovation over traditionalism in the materials, forms, and style of literature... good poetry is “the spontaneous overflow of powerful feelings.” According to this view, poetry is not primarily a mirror of men in action; on the contrary, its essential component is the poet’s own feelings, while the process of composition, since it is “spontaneous,” is the opposite of the artful manipulation of means to foreseen ends stressed by the neoclassic critics... To a remarkable degree external nature—the landscape, together with its flora and fauna—became a persistent subject of poetry... many Romantic poems, long and short, invited the reader to identify the protagonists with the poets themselves... What seemed to a number of political liberals the infinite social promise of the French Revolution in the early 1790s fostered the sense in Romantic writers that theirs was a great age of new beginnings and high possibilities. Many writers viewed a human being as endowed with limitless aspiration toward an infinite good envisioned by the faculty of imagination.

### Gothic
**Gothic novel:** The word **Gothic** originally referred to the Goths, an early Germanic tribe, then came to signify “germanic,” then “medieval.” “Gothic architecture” now denotes the medieval form of architecture, characterized by the use of the high pointed arch and vault, flying buttresses, and intricate recesses, which spread through western Europe between the twelfth and sixteenth centuries.
The **Gothic novel**, or in an alternative term, **Gothic romance**, is a type of prose fiction which was inaugurated by Horace Walpole’s *The Castle of Otranto: A Gothic Story* (1764)—the subtitle denotes its setting in the Middle Ages—and flourished through the early nineteenth century. Some writers followed Walpole’s example by setting their stories in the medieval period; others set them in a Catholic country, especially Italy or Spain. The locale was often a gloomy castle furnished with dungeons, subterranean passages, and sliding panels; the typical story focused on the sufferings imposed on an innocent heroine by a cruel and lustful villain, and made bountiful use of ghosts, mysterious disappearances, and other sensational and supernatural occurrences (which in a number of novels turned out to have natural explanations). The principal aim of such novels was to evoke chilling terror by exploiting mystery and a variety of horrors. Many of them are now read mainly as period pieces, but the best opened up to fiction the realm of the irrational and of the perverse impulses and nightmarish terrors that lie beneath the orderly surface of the civilized mind...
The term “Gothic” has also been extended to a type of fiction which lacks the exotic setting of the earlier romances, but develops a brooding atmosphere of gloom and terror, represents events that are uncanny or macabre or melodramatically violent, and often deals with aberrant psychological states.

### Pre-Raphaelite Movement
**Pre-Raphaelites:** In 1848 a group of English artists, including Dante Gabriel Rossetti, William Holman Hunt, and John Millais, organized the “Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood.” Their aim was to replace the reigning academic style of painting by a return to the truthfulness, simplicity, and spirit of devotion which they attributed to Italian painting before the time of Raphael (1483–1520) and the other painters of the high Italian Renaissance. The ideals of this group of painters were taken over by a literary movement which included Dante Gabriel Rossetti himself (who was a poet as well as a painter), his sister Christina Rossetti, William Morris, and Algernon Swinburne. Dante Gabriel Rossetti’s poem “The Blessed Damozel” typifies the medievalism, the pictorial realism with symbolic overtones, and the union of flesh and spirit, sensuousness and religiousness, associated with the earlier writings of this school. Other examples are Christina Rossetti’s remarkable poem “Goblin Market” (1862) and William Morris’ narrative in verse *The Earthly Paradise* (1868–70).

### Realism
**realism and naturalism:** **Realism** is applied by literary critics in two diverse ways: (1) to identify a movement in the writing of novels during the nineteenth century that included Honoré de Balzac in France, George Eliot in England, and William Dean Howells in America (see *realistic novel*, under *novel*), and (2) to designate a recurrent mode, in various eras and literary forms, of representing human life and experience in literature.
Realistic fiction is often opposed to romantic fiction. The *romance* is said to present life as we would have it be—more picturesque, fantastic, adventurous, or heroic than actuality; realism, on the other hand, is said to represent life as it really is... It is more useful to identify realism in terms of the intended effect on the reader: realistic fiction is written to give the effect that it represents life and the social world as it seems to the common reader, evoking the sense that its characters might in fact exist, and that such things might well happen. To achieve such effects, the novelists we identify as realists may or may not be selective in subject matter—although most of them prefer the commonplace and the everyday, represented in minute detail, over rarer aspects of life—but they must render their materials in ways that make them seem to their readers the very stuff of ordinary experience.

### Existentialism
*Note: A full entry for Existentialism is not available in the provided text. The book's index points to a page where the entry does not exist. The following is the most relevant verbatim passage from the entry for "literature of the absurd."*
After the 1940s, however, there was a widespread tendency, especially prominent in the **existential philosophy** of men of letters such as Jean-Paul Sartre and Albert Camus, to view a human being as an isolated existent who is cast into an alien universe; to conceive the human world as possessing no inherent truth, value, or meaning; and to represent human life—in its fruitless search for purpose and significance, as it moves from the nothingness whence it came toward the nothingness where it must end—as an existence which is both anguished and absurd.

### Stream of Consciousness
**stream of consciousness:** A phrase used by William James in his *Principles of Psychology* (1890) to describe the unbroken flow of perceptions, memories, thoughts, and feelings in the waking mind; it has since been adopted to describe a narrative method in modern fiction. Long passages of introspection, in which the narrator records in detail what passes through a character’s awareness, are found in novelists from Samuel Richardson, through William James’ brother Henry James, to many novelists of the present era... As it has been refined since the 1920s, “stream of consciousness” is the name applied specifically to a mode of narration that undertakes to reproduce the full spectrum and continuous flow of a character’s mental process, in which sense perceptions mingle with conscious and half-conscious thoughts, memories, expectations, feelings, and random associations.
Some critics use “stream of consciousness” interchangeably with the term **interior monologue**. It is useful, however, to follow the usage of critics who use the former as the inclusive term, denoting all the diverse means employed by authors to communicate the total state and process of consciousness in a character. “Interior monologue” is then reserved for that species of stream of consciousness which undertakes to present to the reader the course and rhythm of consciousness precisely as it occurs in a character’s mind.

### Symbolism
**Symbolist Movement:** Various poets of the *Romantic Period*, including Novalis and Hölderlin in Germany and Shelley in England, often used private symbols in their poetry (see *symbol*)... In the usage of literary historians, however, **Symbolist Movement** designates specifically a group of French writers beginning with Charles Baudelaire (*Fleurs du mal*, 1857) and including such later poets as Arthur Rimbaud, Paul Verlaine, Stéphane Mallarmé, and Paul Valéry. Baudelaire based the symbolic mode of his poems in part on the example of the American Edgar Allan Poe, but especially on the ancient belief in **correspondences**—the doctrine that there exist inherent and systematic analogies between the human mind and the outer world, and also between the material and the spiritual worlds. As Baudelaire put this doctrine: “Everything, form, movement, number, color, perfume, in the spiritual as in the natural world, is significative, reciprocal, converse, correspondent.” The techniques of the French Symbolists, who exploited an order of private symbols in a poetry of rich suggestiveness rather than explicit signification, had an immense influence throughout Europe, and (especially in the 1890s and later) in England and America on poets such as Arthur Symons and Ernest Dowson (see *Decadence*) as well as W. B. Yeats, Ezra Pound, Dylan Thomas, Hart Crane, e. e. cummings, and Wallace Stevens.

### Modernism
**modernism and postmodernism:** The term **modernism** is widely used to identify new and distinctive features in the subjects, forms, concepts, and styles of literature and the other arts in the early decades of the twentieth century, but especially after World War I (1914–18). The specific features signified by “modernism” (or by the adjective *modernist*) vary with the user, but many critics agree that it involves a deliberate and radical break with some of the traditional bases not only of Western art, but of Western culture in general. Important intellectual precursors of modernism, in this sense, are thinkers who had questioned the certainties that had supported traditional modes of social organization, religion, and morality, and also traditional ways of conceiving the human self—thinkers such as Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900), Karl Marx, Sigmund Freud, and James G. Frazer... Some literary historians locate the beginning of the modernist revolt as far back as the 1890s, but most agree that what is called **high modernism**, marked by an unexampled scope and rapidity of change, came after the First World War... T. S. Eliot wrote in a review of Joyce’s *Ulysses* in 1923 that the inherited mode of ordering a literary work, which assumed a relatively coherent and stable social order, could not accord with “the immense panorama of futility and anarchy which is contemporary history.” ... A prominent feature of modernism is the phenomenon called the **avant-garde** (a French military metaphor: “advance-guard”); that is, a small, self-conscious group of artists and authors who deliberately undertake, in Ezra Pound’s phrase, to “make it new.”

### Post-Modernism
The term **postmodernism** is often applied to the literature and art after World War II (1939–45), when the effects on Western morale of the First World War were greatly exacerbated by the experience of Nazi totalitarianism and mass extermination, the threat of total destruction by the atomic bomb, the progressive devastation of the natural environment, and the ominous fact of overpopulation. Postmodernism involves not only a continuation, sometimes carried to an extreme, of the countertraditional experiments of modernism, but also diverse attempts to break away from modernist forms which had, inevitably, become in their turn conventional, as well as to overthrow the elitism of modernist “high art” by recourse for models to the “mass culture” in film, television, newspaper cartoons, and popular music. Many of the works of postmodern literature—by Jorge Luis Borges, Samuel Beckett, Vladimir Nabokov, Thomas Pynchon, Roland Barthes, and many others—so blend literary genres, cultural and stylistic levels, the serious and the playful, that they resist classification according to traditional literary rubrics... Postmodernism in literature and the arts has parallels with the movement known as *poststructuralism* in linguistic and literary theory...

## Additional Literary Terms and Figures of Speech

*The following literary terms and figures of speech were not explicitly listed in your syllabus but have appeared in the provided Previous Year Question papers. The definitions are extracted verbatim from M.H. Abrams' "A Glossary of Literary Terms" where available. For terms not found in the glossary, a definition has been composed in the same style.*

### Biography
**biography:** Late in the seventeenth century, John Dryden defined biography neatly as “the history of particular men’s lives.” The name now connotes a relatively full account of a particular person’s life, involving the attempt to set forth character, temperament, and milieu, as well as the subject’s activities and experiences.
Both the ancient Greeks and Romans produced short, formal lives of individuals. The most famed surviving example is the *Parallel Lives* of Greek and Roman notables by the Greek writer Plutarch, c. AD 46–120; in the translation by Sir Thomas North in 1579, it was the source of Shakespeare’s plays on Roman subjects. Medieval authors wrote generalized chronicles of the deeds of a king, as well as **hagiographies**: the stylized lives of Christian saints, often based more on pious legends than on fact. In England, the fairly detailed secular biography appeared in the seventeenth century; the most distinguished instance is Izaak Walton’s *Lives* (including short biographies of the poets John Donne and George Herbert), written between 1640 and 1678.
The eighteenth century in England is the age of the emergence of the full-scale biography, and also of the theory of biography as a special literary genre. It was the century of Samuel Johnson’s *Lives of the English Poets* (1779–81) and of the best known of all English biographies, James Boswell’s *Life of Samuel Johnson* (1791). In our own time, biographies of notable women and men have become one of the most popular of literary forms, and usually there is at least one biographical title high on the best seller list.
**Autobiography** is a biography written by the subject about himself or herself. It is to be distinguished from the **memoir**, in which the emphasis is not on the author’s developing self but on the people and events that the author has known or witnessed, and also from the private **diary** or **journal**, which is a day-to-day record of the events in one’s life, written for personal use and satisfaction, with little or no thought of publication.

### Burlesque
**burlesque:** Burlesque has been succinctly defined as “an incongruous imitation”; that is, it imitates the manner (the form and style) or else the subject matter of a serious literary work or a literary genre, but makes the imitation amusing by a ridiculous disparity between the manner and the matter. The burlesque may be written for the sheer fun of it; usually, however, it is a form of *satire*. The butt of the satiric ridicule may be the particular work or the genre that is being imitated, or else the subject matter to which the imitation is incongruously applied, or (often) both of these together.
“Burlesque,” “parody,” and “travesty” are sometimes applied interchangeably; simply to equate these terms, however, is to surrender useful critical distinctions. It is better to follow the critics who use “burlesque” as the generic name and use the other terms to discriminate species of burlesque...
**I. Varieties of high burlesque:**
**A. A parody** imitates the serious manner and characteristic features of a particular literary work, or the distinctive style of a particular author, or the typical stylistic and other features of a serious literary genre, and deflates the original by applying the imitation to a lowly or comically inappropriate subject.
**B. A mock epic or mock-heroic poem** is that type of parody which imitates, in a sustained way, both the elaborate form and the ceremonious style of the epic genre, but applies it to narrate a commonplace or trivial subject matter.
**II. Varieties of low burlesque:**
**A. The Hudibrastic poem** takes its name from Samuel Butler’s *Hudibras* (1663), which satirized rigid Puritanism by describing the adventures of a Puritan knight, Sir Hudibras. Instead of the doughty deeds and dignified style of the traditional genre of the *chivalric romance*, however, we find the knightly hero experiencing mundane and humiliating misadventures which are described in doggerel verses and a ludicrously colloquial idiom.
**B. The travesty** mocks a particular work by treating its lofty subject in a grotesquely undignified manner and style.

### Comic Relief
**comic relief:** Comic relief is the introduction of comic characters, speeches, or scenes in a serious or tragic work, especially a drama. Such elements were almost universal in Elizabethan tragedy. Sometimes they occur merely as episodes of dialogue or horseplay for purposes of alleviating tension and adding variety. In more carefully wrought plays, however, they are integrated with the plot, in a way that counterpoints and enhances the serious or tragic significance. Examples of such complex uses of comic elements are the gravediggers in *Hamlet* (V. i.), the scene of the drunken porter after the murder of the king in *Macbeth* (II. iii.), the Falstaff scenes in *1 Henry IV*, and the roles of Mercutio and the old nurse in *Romeo and Juliet*.

### Oxymoron
*Note: This term is defined within the entry for Paradox.*
From the entry "paradox":
> If the paradoxical utterance conjoins two terms that in ordinary usage are contraries, it is called an **oxymoron**; an example is Alfred, Lord Tennyson’s “O Death in life, the days that are no more.” The oxymoron was a familiar type of *Petrarchan conceit* in Elizabethan love poetry, in phrases like “pleasing pains,” “I burn and freeze,” “loving hate.” It is also a frequent figure in devotional prose and religious poetry as a way of expressing the Christian mysteries, which transcend human sense and logic. So John Milton describes the appearance of God, in *Paradise Lost* (III, 380):
> > Dark with excessive bright thy skirts appear.

### Paradox
**paradox:** A paradox is a statement which seems on its face to be logically contradictory or absurd, yet turns out to be interpretable in a way that makes sense. An instance is the conclusion to John Donne’s sonnet “Death, Be Not Proud”:
> One short sleep past, we wake eternally
> And death shall be no more; Death, thou shalt die.
The paradox is used occasionally by almost all poets, but was a persistent and central device in seventeenth-century *metaphysical poetry*, in both its religious and secular forms. Donne, who wrote a prose collection titled *Problems and Paradoxes*, exploited the figure constantly in his poetry. “The Canonization,” for example, is organized as an extended proof, full of local paradoxes, of the paradoxical thesis that sexual lovers are saints. Paradox is also a frequent component in verbal *wit*.

### Pun
**pun:** Pun (which traditional rhetoricians call **paranomasia**) denotes a play on words that are either identical in sound (homonyms) or very similar in sound, but are sharply diverse in significance; an example is the last word in the title of Oscar Wilde’s comedy, *The Importance of Being Earnest* (1895). Puns have often had serious literary uses. The authority of the Pope in Roman Catholicism goes back to the Greek pun uttered by Jesus in Matthew 16:18, “Thou art Peter [Petros] and upon this rock [petra] I will build my church.” Shakespeare and other writers used puns seriously as well as for comic purposes. In *Romeo and Juliet* (III. i. 101) Mercutio, bleeding to death, says grimly, “Ask for me tomorrow and you shall find me a grave man”; and John Donne’s solemn “Hymn to God the Father” (1633) puns throughout on his own name and the past participle “done.” ...
A special type of pun, known as the **equivoque**, is the use of a single word or phrase which has two disparate meanings, in a context which makes both meanings equally relevant. An example is the phrase “come to dust” in a song from Shakespeare’s *Cymbeline*: “Golden lads and girls all must, / As chimney sweepers, come to dust.”

### Soliloquy
**soliloquy:** Soliloquy is the act of talking to oneself, whether silently or aloud. In drama it denotes the convention by which a character, alone on the stage, utters his or her thoughts aloud. Playwrights have used this device as a convenient way to convey information about a character’s motives and state of mind, or for purposes of exposition, and sometimes in order to guide the judgments and responses of the audience. Christopher Marlowe’s *Dr. Faustus* (first performed in 1594) opens with a long expository soliloquy, and concludes with another which expresses Faustus’ frantic mental and emotional state during his belated attempts to evade damnation. The best-known of dramatic soliloquies is Hamlet’s speech which begins “To be or not to be.” Compare *monologue*.
A related stage device is the **aside**, in which a character expresses to the audience his or her thought or intention in a short speech which, by convention, is inaudible to the other characters on the stage. Both devices, common in Elizabethan and later drama, were largely rejected by dramatists in the later nineteenth century, when the increasing requirement that plays convey the illusion of real life impelled writers to exploit indirect means for revealing a character’s state of mind, and for conveying exposition and guidance to the audience.

### Transferred Epithet
*Note: This term does not have a dedicated entry in the provided glossary. The following definition is composed in the book's style.*
A **transferred epithet** is a figure of speech in which an epithet (an adjective or adjectival phrase) is shifted from the noun it would logically describe to another noun in the same sentence. This "transfer" creates a more compact, vivid, and sometimes surprisingly integrated image by linking a human quality to an inanimate object or an abstract concept associated with the action.
The effect is to personify the object or to fuse the subjective feeling with the objective scene. A canonical example is from Thomas Gray's "Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard":
> The ploughman homeward plods his weary way
Here, the epithet "weary" logically describes the "ploughman," but it has been transferred to the "way." The way itself is not weary, but the transferal poetically conveys the exhaustion of the man who travels it. Other examples include phrases such as "a sleepless night" (where it is the person, not the night, who is sleepless) or Virgil's "the angry murmur of the sea."
The transferred epithet is a subtle form of *hypallage* and is a device used to achieve compression and a fresh perspective, making the language more suggestive and evocative than a more direct, logical statement would be.